1. INTRODUCTION

dtach is a program written in C that emulates the detach feature of
screen, which allows a program to be executed in an environment that is
protected from the controlling terminal. For instance, the program under
the control of dtach would not be affected by the terminal being
disconnected for some reason.

dtach was written because screen did not adequately meet my needs; I did
not need screen's extra features, such as support for multiple
terminals or terminal emulation support. screen was also too big,
bulky, and had source code that was difficult to understand.

screen also interfered with my use of full-screen applications such as
emacs and ircII, due to its excessive interpretation of the stream between
the program and the attached terminals. dtach does not have a terminal
emulation layer, and passes the raw output stream of the program to the
attached terminals. The only input processing that dtach does perform is
scanning for the detach character (which signals dtach to detach from
the program) and processing the suspend key (which tells dtach to
temporarily suspend itself without affecting the running program), and both
of these can both be disabled if desired.

Contrary to screen, dtach has minimal features, and is extremely tiny.
This allows dtach to be more easily audited for bugs and security
holes, and makes it accessible in environments where space is limited,
such as on rescue disks.

dtach has only been tested on the Linux/x86 platform, however it should
be easily portable to other variants of Unix. It currently assumes that
the host system uses POSIX termios, and has a working forkpty function
available.

2. QUICK START

Compiling dtach should be simple, as it uses autoconf:

	$ ./configure
	$ make

If all goes well, a dtach binary should be built for your system. You can
then copy it to the appropriate place on your system.

dtach uses Unix-domain sockets to represent sessions; these are network
sockets that are stored in the filesystem. You specify the name of the
socket that dtach should use when creating or attaching to dtach sessions.

For example, let's create a new session that is running ircII. We will use
/tmp/foozle as the session's socket:

	$ dtach -A /tmp/foozle irc RuneB irc.openprojects.net

Here, -A tells dtach to either create a new session or attach to the
existing session. If the session at /tmp/foozle does not exist yet, the
program will be executed. If it does exist, then dtach will attach to
the existing session.

dtach has another attach mode, which is specified by using -a. The -a
mode attaches to an already existing session, but will not create a
new session. Each attaching process can have a separate detach character
and suspend behavior, which are explained in the following sections.

dtach is able to attach to the same session multiple times, though you
will likely encounter problems if your terminals have different window
sizes. Pressing ^L (Ctrl-L) will reset the window size of the program to
match the current terminal.

3. DETACHING FROM THE SESSION

By default, dtach scans the keyboard input looking for the detach character.
When the detach character is pressed, dtach will detach from the current
session and exit, leaving the program running in the background. You can then
re-attach to the program by running dtach again with -A or -a.

The default detach character is ^\ (Ctrl-\). This can be changed by supplying
the -e option to dtach when attaching. For example:

	$ dtach -a /tmp/foozle -e '^A'

That command would attach to the existing session at /tmp/foozle and use
^A (Ctrl-A) as the detach character, instead of the default ^\.

You can disable processing of the detach character by supplying the -E
option to dtach when attaching.

4. SUSPENDING DTACH

By default, dtach also processes the suspend key (^Z or Ctrl-Z) itself,
instead of passing it to the program. Thus, pressing suspend only suspends
the attaching process, instead of the running program. This can be very
useful for applications such as ircII, where you may not necessarily want
the program to be suspended.

Processing of the suspend key can be disabled by supplying the -z option
to dtach when attaching.

5. CHANGES

The changes since version 0.3 are:
- Slightly improved README and dtach.1

The changes in version 0.3 are:
- Fixed a typo in dtach.1
- Changed the attach code so that it tells the master when a suspend
  occurs.
- Decreased the client <-> master packet size.
- Changed the master to send a stream of text to attaching clients
  instead of sending a huge packet all the time.
- Use getrlimit and dynamically allocate the data structures, if
  possible.
- Added some more autoconf checks.
- Initial sourceforge release.
 
6. AUTHOR

dtach is (C)Copyright 2001 Ned T. Crigler, and is under the GNU General
Public License.

Comments and suggestions about dtach are welcome, and can be sent to
the author at: <crigler@hell-city.org>.
